=====================================================================
 rparse - a data-driven parser for Probabilistic LCFRS
=====================================================================

.. image:: http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/emmy/emmy.jpg
   :align: right
   :alt: Emmy Noether Logo

.. image:: http://www.wolfgang-maier.net/fserv/misc/hhu.jpg
   :align: right
   :alt: HHU Logo

rparse is a data-driven parser for Probabilistic Linear Context-Free
Rewriting Systems (PLCFRS). It has been developed at the Emmy Noether
group of Prof. Dr. Laura Kallmeyer at the University of Tübingen,
Germany and is now maintained at her project "Grammar Formalisms
beyond Context-Free Grammars and their use for Machine Learning Tasks"
at the Department for Computational Linguistics at the Institute for
Language and Information at the University of Düsseldorf, Germany (see
http://phil.hhu.de/beyond-cfg). The project is sponsored by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). 

In case of questions or comments, please contact Wolfgang Maier
(maierw@hhu.de). 

.. contents::

References
==========

In order to reference this parser, please cite

  Laura Kallmeyer and Wolfgang Maier (2013):  *Data-driven Parsing 
  using Probabilistic Linear Context-Free Rewriting Systems." 
  Computational Linguistics, 39(1). 

for a general description of the parser and constituency parsing
evaluation, 

  Wolfgang Maier and Laura Kallmeyer (2010):  *Discontinuity and
  Non-Projectivity: Using Mildly Context-Sensitive Formalisms for
  Data-Driven Parsing.* In: Proceedings of the 10th International
  Conference on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms
  (TAG+10), Yale University.  

for grammar-based parsing of non-projective dependencies and its
evaluation, and

  Wolfgang Maier, Miriam Kaeshammer and Laura Kallmeyer (2012):
  *Data-Driven PLCFRS Parsing Revisited: Restricting the Fan-Out to
  Two.* In: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on
  Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+11), Paris,
  France.    

for parsing with a (2,2)-PLCFRS.

License
=======

The code is released under the GNU General Public Licence (GPL) 2.0 or
higher. The release include a copy of the library *jgrapht*, which is
licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL) 2.1. The
full license texts of the GPL 2.0 and the LGPL 2.1 can be found at  
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0 and
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.  

Quick Start
===========


Compile
-------

The parser is written in Java, Java 7 is required. In order to run it,
you need the *jgrapht* library. *jgrapht* (http://jgrapht.org) is included
with this release in the /lib directory. You have to compile the
parser against your copy of *jgrapht*. This can be done using the ant
build file included in the rparse package, to which you have to pass
the location of the compiled *jgrapht* library as follows::

  $ ant -Djgraph.path="/path/to/jgrapht"

This will build a jar file rparse.jar in the rparse package. The
classpath in the manifest of the jar file will contain the path to
jgrapht. If you want to use a different copy of jgrapht, pass both
jars in the class path and use the rparse entry point::

  de.tuebingen.rparse.ui.Rparse

Run
---

The default format for training is the export format. In order to
train the parser on NeGra, run something like the following::

  $ java -jar rparse.jar \
         -doTrain \
         -train path-to-training-corpus \
         -headFinder negra \
         -saveModel path-to-trained-model

In order to parser something with the trained model, you need to pass
the parser a POS tagged sentence (rparse cannot do POS tagging on its
own yet). The default input format is one word+POS tag combination per
line, separated by a slash. A call to the parser would look something
like the following::

  $ java -jar rparse.jar \
         -doParse \
         -test path-to-test-corpus \
         -readModel path-to-trained-model

In order to evaluate your output, use::

  $ java -jar rparse.jar \
         -doEval \
         -test path-to-test-corpus \
         -readModel path-to-trained-model

Make sure you also check the output of java -jar rparse.jar -help.

Changelog
=========

**New in version 2.0**

Fast parser for (2,2)-PLCFRS. Can be accessed via -parserType
cyktwo. You also should use -binType optimal for obtaining a low
fan-out during binarization. Default in mode -doParse remains old
parser (-parserType cyk). 

